The Project Gutenberg EBook of Peanut, by Albert Bigelow Paine

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Peanut
       The Story of a Boy

Author: Albert Bigelow Paine

Release Date: January 31, 2018 [EBook #56481]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PEANUT ***




Produced by Barry Abrahamsen and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









                                BOOKS BY

                          ALBERT BIGELOW PAINE


      “PEANUT.” Illustrated. 16mo net $ .50

      MARK TWAIN: A BIOGRAPHY. Illustrated.

        Octavo, Uniform Red Cloth, Trade Edition, 3 Vols. (in a box) net
        $6.00

        Octavo, Cloth, Full Gilt Backs, Gilt Tops, Library Edition, 3
        Vols. (in a box) net 7.00

        Octavo, Three-quarter Calf, Gilt Tops, 3 Vols. (in a box) net
        14.50

        Octavo, Three-quarter Levant, Gilt Tops, 3 Vols. (in a box) net
        15.50

      THE SHIP DWELLERS. Illustrated. 8vo net 1.50

      THE TENT-DWELLERS. Illustrated. Post 8vo 1.50

      THE HOLLOW TREE SNOWED-IN BOOK. Ill’d. Crown 8vo 1.50

      THE HOLLOW TREE AND DEEP WOODS BOOK. Illustrated. Post 8vo 1.50

      FROM VAN-DWELLER TO COMMUTER. Illustrated. Post 8vo 1.50

      LIFE OF THOMAS NAST. Illustrated. 8vo net 5.00


                                -------

                      HARPER & BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS, N. Y.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




[Illustration: Frontispiece - Peanut]




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                “Peanut”

                  ------------------------------------


                           THE STORY OF A BOY

                                   BY

                          ALBERT BIGELOW PAINE

                               AUTHOR OF

                         MARK TWAIN—A BIOGRAPHY
                        THE TENT-DWELLERS, ETC.

                      HARPER & BROTHERS PUBLISHERS

                          NEW YORK AND LONDON

                                MCMXIII




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                 COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY HARPER & BROTHERS

                                -------

                PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

                                -------

                        PUBLISHED OCTOBER, 1913




------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                “PEANUT”


                             [Illustration]




                                   I


THE blackened stumps had been left—perhaps more easily to identify the
little clearing about the grave. From the ravine below, where the stage
passed, they were still visible, but the two-inch headboard,
weather-beaten by a year of sun and rain, was getting lost in a growth
of bushes. When pointed out by the driver as marking the “last hangout
of Blazer Sam,” who had “died with his boots on, and had two cuss-words
in his epitaph,” it could be discerned now with difficulty and there
were travelers, men mostly, who prevailed upon the somewhat garrulous
official to “let the horses blow a little while” they scaled the
mountain for a closer view. The epitaph itself was worth the climb.

A few of those who had made the steep ascent for that literary treat,
and to pay their respects to the grave of the notorious desperado,
highwayman, and general outlaw, had seen something dart away into the
bushes at their approach. As a rule, they had been too far off to tell
whether it was a coyote, a jack-rabbit, or a boy. Those who had obtained
the closer view usually agreed that it was a boy—a very thin boy of
about ten, with pale hair and no head-covering.

The stage-driver in due time acquired information. Those who had said it
was a boy were correct. When Blazer Sam had made his final exit in the
abrupt manner noted, and so taken his boots with him, he had left behind
the Rose of Texas, acquired long before in a poker game, and a little
waif known as Peanut, picked up like a stray kitten during one of the
Blazer’s devious wanderings. The name Peanut might have come from the
color of his hair, or from his small size and value. The driver did not
know. He had heard that the boy had been kindly treated by both the
Blazer and the Rose, and with the latter still occupied Sam’s little hut
in the woods above the clearing. The waif probably came out into the
opening to see the stage pass. Then again he might be “kinder lonesome
for Sam.”

The driver was right in at least one of these conjectures. Peanut was
indeed “lonesome for Sam.” He could remember very little preceding the
day six years before when Sam had brought him home to be company for the
Rose, during absences that had grown ever more prolonged as the years
passed and the outlaw’s field of labor had been found farther and yet
farther away from his cabin on the hillside. What Peanut did remember
was that he never had been hungry since that day. Also, the times when
Sam had come home. For whatever had been the source of Sam’s gains, he
had provided well for the Rose; and if, as was said, the hand of every
man was against him and his hand against every man you could not have
guessed it to see the small, lean hand of Peanut locked closely in his
own, and the two wandering over the mountain together in those days that
were now no more and would never more return. There remained to Peanut
only their memory and the barren comfort of a grave and an epitaph.

Yet these were much to the lonely child. When he had pushed through the
bushes to the grave he felt close to Sam, while the vigor of the
epitaph, which he could read, because this much the Rose had taught him,
was somehow satisfying. The last line afforded him special comfort. It
assured him that no one would ever dare to take Sam away.

It did not occur to him that there was anything objectionable in the
lines. He did not know that epitaphs are not so true, as a rule; while
as for the emphasis, it was of the sort he knew best. That he did not
use those words himself was only for the same reason that he did not
chew tobacco yet, or drink whisky. He had been assured by the Rose that
these luxuries were not for little boys, and he had been willing to
wait. He was glad, however, that Sam, who had indulged liberally in the
good things of life, could still have the best on his tombstone.

Portions of the inscription puzzled him. He did not know that there had
been a price on the outlaw’s head, and he wondered why the “greaser,”
referred to in line three, should want to kill Sam. Neither did he
realize that line two doubtless alluded to the Blazer’s slight valuation
of life in general, rather than to any disregard of his own particular
existence. Peanut failed to understand why it was that Sam had not cared
for life when by living he could come home now and then and show him the
trout brook, and make whistles for him, and visit the eagle’s nest in
the cliff. Why, once they had even found a cave, and in it a shot and
dying mother bear, with two little bears, that were now big bears and
still came to the cabin to be fed. When it rained they had sometimes run
for this cave, to build a fire at the mouth of it and to lie there and
watch the blaze and talk and play with the bears until the rain was
over. What was the reason, then, that Sam had not cared to live and have
all these things when he, Peanut, had cared for them so much?

He cared for them still. He could find his way to the brook and the
eagle’s nest, and to the cave where the bears were always glad to see
him, especially when he brought food. The innumerable squirrels and
birds and other wood-folk were his own; yet from them all he turned each
day to Sam’s grave, there to live over again those other days when Sam
had taught him the lore and kinship of the mountains, and when, hand in
hand, they had pushed through vines and leaves to visit the forest
people together.

Often when it was bright and warm he stayed by the grave most of the
day, and sometimes, with his face down in the grass, he would talk to
Sam. When it stormed he crept under the bushes and felt a deep
commiseration for the lonely mound with the rain pelting down upon it.
There had been times in winter, when the snow was deepest, that he could
not go at all. On these days he moped in the house with the Rose, who
since Sam’s death had supplied their meager wants by doing mending and
an occasional washing for the mining-camp below. She had grown rather
fat and silent and spent most of her days playing solitaire and telling
her own fortune with a greasy pack of cards, which diversions did not
appeal to Peanut.

But in supposing that Peanut had come out into the clearing to see the
stage pass, the driver had been wholly wrong. Sam had never cared for
the stage or for people. In fact, he had rather avoided those things,
Peanut thought, and he knew Sam always had good reasons for what he did.
When the boy saw strangers climbing the steep hill to visit the grave he
fled hastily into the bushes, where, lying hid, he watched to see that
they did not carry anything away save perhaps an occasional
walking-stick or a handful of goldenrod. When they laughed and talked
loudly he was fiercely angry, and thought he understood why it was that
Sam had preferred the society of the quiet wood-folk.

With those of his own age Peanut had had but one experience. Twice the
Rose had prevailed upon him to go with her to the mining-camp, and on
the last of these occasions a boy—the only one in the camp—had defrauded
him of his best whistle and of such other valuables as had been upon his
person at the time. He had received in exchange some yellow ore, which
the boy had insisted was gold, but which the Rose declared to be slag,
and worthless. It was his first experience with deception.

Peanut had refused to go to the camp again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                   II


ONE day in late August the stage stopped to let a woman climb the hill.
Women visited the grave now and then, and Miss Cynthia Schofield, age
thirty-four, a teacher in a Chicago public institution of learning, was
just the one to improve such an opportunity. For Miss Schofield was
progressive in the matter of acquiring knowledge. She spent each summer
in some elemental region, of which she made numerous photographs and
notes. These she used later in certain illustrated evening lectures
called “In-gatherings,” given by Miss Schofield for the benefit of
persons with fewer opportunities; also for the purpose of adding a
trifle to her own modest income. She was “doing the mines” this year,
and her present destination was the camp, two miles farther down. The
desperado’s grave and history would make a picturesque addition to her
collection.

The climb was harder than it appeared from below. Being the only
passenger, the driver had told her to take her time, and more than once
she leaned against a boulder to look down into the dark ravine made
famous by some of Blazer’s earlier exploits. She recognized the artistic
value of the fact that his last resting-place overlooked the scene of
his former depredations. She must certainly bring this out well in her
lecture, and as she toiled upward she was forming in her mind certain
phrases, with a view to this result. Then she pushed gently between two
small cedars into the opening where the grave was.

At first glance she saw only some bushes and fireweed about the
blackened stumps, and the riotous mass of goldenrod which possessed one
corner of the little clearing. Then just by the goldenrod she saw the
grave, and paused, for, face down upon it, asleep, lay a meager barefoot
boy with faded hair.

Miss Schofield was, first of all, the artist. She had anticipated
nothing so rich in value as this, and with deft hands she adjusted the
camera and secured the range. There came a sharp click, and the outlaw’s
grave, the goldenrod, the fireweed, the black stumps, and the faded
sleeping boy had been added to her store of choice in-gatherings.

There had been still another result. The snap of the shutter had
brought the light figure to its feet, like some spry wood creature as
suddenly disturbed. An instant more and he would have darted away into
the bushes; only, Miss Schofield spoke just then, and with
persuasiveness—the result of long pedagogical training.

“Don’t go! Oh, please don’t!” she pleaded, gently. “_Please_ wait. I
want so much to speak to you.”

Peanut had no particular reason for being afraid of women. The only one
he had studied at close range had been kind to him to the point of
indulgence. There was something in the voice of this one that held him
fast. The woman came a step closer. She seemed young and beautiful to
Peanut.

“_Please_ tell me your name,” she said.

“Peanut.”

“Oh, that is what they call you, perhaps. Your real name, I mean.”

The boy made no reply at first to this comment. He seemed gathering
something from the mists of memory.

“Sam told me that it used to be—longer than that,” he ventured at last,
very slowly. “He told me once that it was Philip—Nutt, but he said P.
was the same as Philip, and that he thought Peanut fit me better.”

Panic seemed about to return, as the result of this long speech, and
once more it required the soothing diplomacy of Miss Schofield to detain
him.

“How very nice,” she said. “And now won’t you please tell me where you
live, and about Sam and the grave?”

Again Peanut hesitated. Then he pointed behind him.

“I live up there; and Sam, he—why he’s in the grave, and dam the man
that moves his bones.”

Miss Schofield had been unprepared for this. Her emotion, however, was
mistaken by Peanut for incredulity. “I can show it to you on the board,”
he insisted, eagerly.

The woman came up close, now, and followed where his wisp of a finger
pointed. As he indicated each line, he repeated it with a sort of
monotonous tenderness, laying special emphasis on the last.

                “Here lies the body of Blazer Sam,
                 For life he didn’t care a dam—
                 He was plugged by a greaser unbeknowns,
                 And dam the man that moves his bones.”

Miss Schofield’s look of concern became one of sympathetic
understanding. The waif turned to her.

“You didn’t want to take Sam away, anyhow, did you?”

“Oh, no indeed! I don’t want to take any one away—” She hesitated and
looked down into the wistful face before her. “At least, not Sam,” she
qualified. “I have already taken a picture of the grave and you shall
have one of them. Tell me, Philip, whom you live with, so I shall know
how to send it.”

The sound of his name thus spoken may have awakened a sort of dignity in
the waif.

“I live with the Rose of Texas,” he said, gravely. “Me an’ Sam both did,
till Sam was plugged by a greaser unbeknowns, and—”

Miss Schofield interrupted rather hastily.

“Never mind the next line, Philip. I remember it. Just a moment—”

She had taken out her note-book and was puzzling over the proper entry.
“Philip Nutt, alias Peanut, Care of the Rose of Texas, former
housekeeper for Blazer Sam.” It seemed a doubtful combination to intrust
to the mail service. Then her face lighted with a sudden resolution.

“Show me just where you live, Philip.”

The boy turned and pointed up the mountain.

“That big spruce grows by the house. It’s on the rocks behind it.”

“I see, Philip. I can find it easily. I must be going now, for the stage
is waiting, but I shall stop a day or two at the mines below here. I
will come to-morrow and learn just how to send the picture. Good-by till
then, Philip.”

She took his thin brown hand in her own soft palm. The mother instinct
welled up strong. She hungered to gather him to her breast, but he was
already drawing back rather fearfully. A step away she turned to wave
another good-by.

Peanut had disappeared among the bushes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                  III


THE Rose of Texas sat in the open door of her cabin. The Rose might have
been beautiful once—it is proper to give any woman past middle age the
benefit of this possibility—and there may have been a time when the Rose
had deserved her name and been fully equal in value to the Colt .44,
three ponies, and five hundred dollars in gold which Sam had stacked up
against her, and so, with the aid of three other knaves, attached her to
his household. On a stone a few feet distant sat Peanut, in deep
reverie. The Rose was first to break the silence.

“I reckon it’s the best thing for you, Peanut,” she said, and there was
a sort of resolute hopelessness in her voice. “It’ll be mighty lonesome,
of course, without you, but when you get so you can write you can send
me a letter now and then. I guess I can read ’em. I ain’t tried any for
a good while, but if you make ’em plain, mebbe I can spell ’em out. It’s
a good chance, Peanut, an’ I don’t s’pose you’d ever get another. Then
you’ll learn figgerin’, too.”

“What’s that, Rose? What’s figgerin’?”

“Why, it’s like writin’, only it’s countin’, on paper. It’s to keep
folks from cheatin’ you, in a trade.”

Peanut recalled his experience with the boy at the mines. The boy
probably knew about figgerin’.

“How long does it take to learn figgerin’, Rose?”

“Oh, I dun’no’. Mebbe a year.”

“Then can I come back to you—an’ the bears, an’ Sam’s grave?”

“You won’t want to. You’ll be learnin’ other things an’ seein’ new
places an’ fine folks. You won’t want to come back to the hills, even if
you could. But you can write, an’ you’ll have a picter of Sam’s grave,
like the kind she showed us to-day. She seems like she’d be mighty good
to you, an’ I reckon you’ll have to go, Peanut.”

“But I’m comin’ back, Rose, when I’ve learnt figgerin’ an’ seen all the
places. I’m comin’ back to locate a mine an’ make money for us. You
can’t stay here always alone. An’ our bears would forgit me if I was
gone too long. You’ll feed ’em jest the same, won’t you, Rose, when I
ain’t here?”

The woman’s voice broke a little as she assured him that the big brown
bears that lumbered down the mountain every day for refuse should still
be cared for in his absence.

“She’s comin’ in the mornin’,” the Rose continued, “an’ if yer goin’,
you want to be ready. Put on yer winter shoes an’ yer hat an’ yer other
shirt. ’Tain’t much of a outfit, but it’s more’n you come with, an’
she’s goin’ to pervide fur you. I’ve got a little scrap o’ money,
though, Peanut, an’ I want you to take it along. You ain’t to spend it
unless somethin’ happens an’ she ain’t there. She’ll pervide when she
is. Jest keep it so you know where it is. If you ever get lost, er need
anything when she ain’t at home, then use it, but keep it as long as you
can.”

The woman’s hand had gone down to the hem of her skirt and under her
knee. It came up holding a small roll of currency.

“There’s ten dollars here, Peanut; it won’t buy much, but it would go a
long ways if you was lost and hungry. Keep it in the little sack, with
Sam’s ambertype an’ the last whistle he made you, an’ don’t let the sack
out o’ yer hands.”

The boy took the money curiously. He had never possessed any before. He
opened the bills and looked first at one, then at the other. He went
into the cabin presently and deposited them in a small buckskin bag
which Sam had given him for his treasures. When Miss Schofield appeared
next morning he was sitting stiffly in his winter shoes and hat, his
wet, faded hair plastered close, the little bag concealed about his
neck. He was quite ready.

The Rose was wiping her eyes as she saw them pass down the mountain in
the direction of Sam’s grave. She was wondering what she was going to do
without Peanut. She did not realize that perhaps Cynthia Schofield was
wondering equally what she was going to do _with_ him—what was to be the
outcome of the philanthropic impulse and heart hunger that had led her
into taking the pathetic little creature by her side, away from his
beloved hills, to begin a new development in a strange atmosphere and
amid alien surroundings.

But if Miss Schofield had any misgivings as to the wisdom of her
undertaking, she was upheld by the thought that her purpose was
altogether righteous, and would be justified by results. The fact that
as they passed Sam’s grave Peanut flung himself upon it and wept, and
refused to be comforted, only strengthened her belief that he would one
day glorify her for having removed him from the influence of former
companionships.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                   IV


IT having developed that at some former period Blazer Sam had been known
by the surname Hopkins, Miss Schofield had agreed with the Rose that the
latter should receive her mail under the very respectable superscription
of Mrs. Rose Hopkins, and at the camp post-office arrangements had been
made to this end. Miss Schofield had further agreed to write. Also that
Peanut should write as soon as he was able to do so.

If the Rose went oftener to the camp now, and, bringing home heavier
bundles, filled longer days with harder work, it may have been only that
she was providing for an old age that could not be far distant, or very
luxurious at best.

If the mail service possessed a new attraction for her, she did not show
it. Her years of lonely secretive life had been not without their
effect. She made no inquiries for letters, and seemed rather surprised
when one day in September the storekeeper, who was also postmaster, laid
a sealed envelope with her package of coffee on the counter.

Both the address and the letter were printed—type-written. The Rose did
not understand this process, and was deeply grateful to Miss Schofield
for taking extra pains to make the reading easy. It was not a long
letter, telling only of her safe arrival in Chicago with Philip, and the
fact that he was already at school, where he would learn very fast. Her
friends thought a great deal of her “little mountain boy,” but she was
trying not to let them spoil him. She wished to keep his nature as fresh
and beautiful as the mountains themselves, adding only such education as
would make him understand the higher life, and such knowledge of the
world as would fit him to take his part in it by and by. Philip had sent
greetings to “Rose and the bears.” He would write before long, himself.
He could already shape the letters, and was at his work constantly. If
the Rose needed anything, she was of course to let Miss Schofield know.
Meantime, she remained, etc., etc.

On the whole it was a satisfactory missive. Peanut was safe and
remembered her. He was learning to write, and would send, by and by,
letters of his own. To the Rose of Texas the type-written sheet
containing these assurances became of more value than all her former
possessions. She pinned it against the cabin wall where she could see it
and pause before it as she passed in her work.

Only, in one sentence of the letter there was a pang. She had called him
_her_ “little mountain boy.” The Rose wondered vaguely if this meant
that she herself had surrendered all claim. The sentence about the
“higher life” rather pleased her. She took it to mean a more pretentious
mode of living. If Peanut should visit her by and by he would probably
come in a buggy, wearing a high hat such as she had seen on rich mine
speculators. She resolved to make an effort herself to live up to this
higher life and so preserve something of her claim on Peanut.

She recalled a tradition that women of the higher life did not drink
whisky—at least not regularly. She would give up her toddies—by degrees,
of course—but in time enough to do without them almost altogether when
Peanut arrived. In the matter of clothes, she had noticed that those
worn by Miss Schofield had been quite plain, not at all like her own
gaudy finery of former years. She would get some very plain clothes,
gradually, as she could earn the money, and have them ready for Peanut’s
return. She would also piece together the remnants of her meager
education.

She obtained at once such literature as could be had at the camp, and
patiently pored over a government survey, and a mutilated primary
arithmetic contributed by one of her patrons. A line to Miss Schofield
would have brought her quantities of educational matter, but this fact
did not occur to her. Indeed, the possibility of ever writing at all did
not enter into her dreams.

In October came the first letter from Peanut:

                    DER ROSE,—The house-es are hi
                  as hils and thair is nois al the tim.
                        Yurs,
                            P. NUTT.

The writing was very round and plain. It seemed marvelous to the Rose
that he could do it already. He would reach the higher life sooner than
she had thought. She would leave out her “between” toddies to-morrow.

A week later brought still another letter. Already there was
improvement.

                   DEAR ROSE,—Thare are no hills
                 here. I luk at my pic-cher of Sams
                 grav ev-ry day. I am lern-ing fig-grin,
                 they call it num-ber work.
                       Yours,
                           P. NUTT.

After that, letters came almost every week, and became the chief life
interest of the lonely woman above the clearing. She pinned them side by
side to the wall of her cabin, that she might read them without the wear
of handling. She learned each by heart as it came, but this in no way
destroyed the joy of after-perusal. She compared the writing, too, and
his rapid improvement gratified her and spurred her to vigorous new
efforts of her own.

I may say here that the boy’s progress gratified Miss Schofield as well.
Alert, eager, sensitive to new impressions, Peanut in two months had
overtaken many of his own age. Some he had passed altogether. In a
November letter, he wrote:

“There is a rale-road here that runs up in the air, and rale-roads on
the groun that go all the time, day an nite. I want to see you and the
bears and Sams grave. And I want to be in the woods where there are no
rale-roads.”

The evident homesickness of this letter touched the Rose deeply. The
“rale-road in the air” made her marvel.

The next letter contained further information.

“Wim-men here do not smoak. And they do not say dam. I mean wim-men like
Miss Schofield.”

The Rose had never been given to profanity. It had been a luxury, to be
indulged in on rare occasions. She could forego it easily. Her pipe
would be a harder matter. Harder even than her toddy—yet, she must do
it—she would begin at once. She resolved that nothing should stand
between her and a share in that higher life for which Peanut was
destined.

Later in November there came a letter in which he said:

“The people here have white stones at their graves in-sted of boards.
They call them marble. They put their names on them, and when they was
born and was kild, or died. They are not alwis kild here. I wish Sam had
a white mar-ble stone with his true name on it. We could keep the other
too. They have one at each end. When I come back I will by one.”

The Rose toiled earlier and later than before. She no longer had time
for solitaire. She also grew thinner, and a new look had come into her
face. The possibility of former beauty could be more easily accorded. A
miner from the camp came one day and wanted to marry her. Some trace of
a far-off former life of coquetry made her laugh and say to him:

“You’re too late. I’ve a sweetheart already. He’s coming in a buggy,
with fine clothes on, and a high hat.”

The miner went back to camp and reported that the Rose had caught a
speculator, who would take her to Ogden in the spring.

Autumn became winter. The bears went to sleep in their cave, and came no
more to the cabin. Blazer Sam’s grave was lost in folds of white, and at
times the lone woman above the clearing was shut in for days. But though
alone, she was no longer lonely. With work and the letters upon the wall
her days had become as dream-days, her nights brief periods of
untroubled sleep. It was only when the passes were blocked and detained
the stage with Peanut’s letter that she minded the storm. At one time
the delay was long. Then she received two, and was proportionately
gratified. In the longer of these he wrote:

“Miss Schofield gives shose. She has a lant-ern that makes pic-tures on
a big sheet. They are seens of where she goes. Last night she shode the
mines and told about them. Then she shode Sams grave with me a-sleep on
it, and it was as big as it is there. She came and took my hand and led
me up in front of the peo-ple and told them it was the grave of the
cel-ib-ra-ted Sam Hopkins, and that he had been called Blazer Sam, and
how she found me asleep on his grave, and how he used to make me
whissels and go with me over the mount-ins. And how he must have had a
good hart to care so much for a lit-tle boy. And when I saw the picture
so big and plain and heard how much she liked Sam too, I had to cry, and
Miss Schofield says that then all the peo-ple cried, and that she must
not do it again. If Miss Schofield was not so good I would come back. I
think about the bears up in their cave a-sleep, and how the snow is on
Sams grave, and how lonesome you must be there alone. She is almost as
good as Sam, and I know now that Sam belonged to the hire life. I guess
he lerned it when he was away so much.”

It is doubtful if Miss Schofield saw all the letters which Peanut wrote
to the Rose. I have reason to believe that she saw none of them after
the first, and that one only to be sure that it was legible and properly
addressed. She meant to be liberal, and was so, according to her lights.
Her favorite word was “spontaneity” and she was eager to allow the boy
his own privacy and expression—any form of freedom, indeed, that did not
conflict with the lives of others or with his spiritual development.

Concerning his former guardian and beloved hero, she carefully avoided
any suggestion that would tend to destroy a beautiful illusion of
childhood. In the boy’s dream-life Sam had been all that he appeared,
and there must be no rude awakening. Little by little, as we learn the
truth about Santa Claus and fairies, and never wholly lose faith in
them, so in due course and almost imperceptibly would come enlightenment
and a truer understanding.

But this attitude did not prevent Miss Schofield from dilating upon the
lurid history of Blazer Sam in her entertainment, as usually given.
Peanut was absent at such times, and the audience unknown to him. It was
one of her choicest bits, and the grim humor of it was only heightened
by the touch of pathos supplied by the picture of the grave with the
sleeping figure of Peanut, the story of his devotion to the outlaw, and
his present relation to herself. As I have said, Miss Schofield was,
before all, the artist.

Nor would it be fair, I think, to attach blame to Miss Schofield for
what the super-sensitive reader might regard as a certain disloyalty to
Peanut. Certainly it was proper to leave his faith in Sam’s goodness
undisturbed, at least through the boy’s trusting childhood; while it was
no less justifiable to make such use of the facts as would best serve
their artistic presentation. The ends of art have justified conditions
far more questionable than these, and her error, if there was an error,
would seem to have been an earlier matter—committed on that August day
when, following a sudden half-romantic, half-philanthropic impulse, she
was prompted to transplant, to a crowded and noisy environment, a life
so essentially a thing of the open sky and the wide freedom of the
hills. But perhaps there are no mistakes in this world. A good many
otherwise reasonable persons hold by this doctrine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                   V


MISS Schofield had been careful to see that Peanut was in bed and asleep
on that night in June when the schools closed and she was giving a cozy
supper to her fellow-teachers. Ever since the breaking of the buds in
the park the boy had been restless, and she did not wish him to be
disturbed by the voices and merriment of her company. Then, too, a
little private exhibition of some of her choicest “in-gatherings” would
follow, and it would not do for her group of special friends to be
deprived of any feature of her collection. They would be quite sure to
want the outlaw’s grave and her picturesque narrative accompaniment.

She bent over the sleeping boy and listened to his heavy breathing. What
a joy and comfort he was to her! She had felt his hunger for the open
air and the breath of the mountains. Yet how faithful he had been to his
books—how little he had mingled with the sports of other children! He
was of different fiber. And what progress he had made! Some day the
world would honor and claim him. Now he was all hers—her captive
wood-creature—her dreamer, her poet! She bent over and lightly kissed
his hair. Sometimes she had strained him to her bosom. She longed to do
so now, but a moment later was stepping silently to the door, then as
silently she closed it and drew the heavy curtain without.

Miss Schofield was not mistaken in the expectations of her guests. Like
their pupils, the merry teachers rejoiced in a newly acquired freedom
and wished to be amused. In the darkened parlor they forgot the year’s
restraints and labors and gave themselves up to luxury of enjoyment.

As the gem of the programme, the Blazer’s grave was held for the last.
When at length it was thrown upon the sheet there was a chorus of
approval and a round of applause. And Cynthia Schofield rose to the
occasion. She had never been so full of joy in the present, so satisfied
with what life had brought to her in the past, so pleased with the
outlook ahead. The picture on the screen was a part of these happy
conditions, her audience inspiring. Her friends expected the best, and
they should have it. With what subtle art she led up to the incident:
The stopping of the stage, the driver pointing up the hillside with his
whip. Then the scaling of the steep ascent, the pausing here and there
to look down upon the scene of the outlaw’s former crimes, which she
recalled, as she had heard them, in the vernacular of the hills. Next,
her entrance to the little clearing about the grave—the black stumps,
the flowers—and Peanut on the grave, asleep. And her interview with
Peanut! She made it a masterpiece! She even may have colored it a
little—the ends of art would justify that, too. The imitation of
Peanut’s voice, and his monotonous reading of the profane and
half-comprehended epitaph—she gave them with a fidelity that startled
even herself. Her friends became hysterical. At one moment sobbing and
wiping their eyes, at the next laughing, the tears still running down
their cheeks. And then the picture she drew of the Rose of Texas, and of
Peanut when he sat waiting for her to take him away. “Worthy of
Dickens!” they cried out to her. “You must write it, Miss Schofield! You
must certainly write it!”

But Miss Schofield will never write that scene, and those of us who
listened that night in June heard not only its greatest presentation,
but its last. A moment later the lights went up, and she turned for
congratulations. Then she saw him. He stood just inside the door, and
his face was like death.

The prolonged merriment had found its way through the heavy curtain and
closed door. Unable to sleep, he had dressed and come out to find the
cause. He had never been forbidden any part of the house, and at the
entrance of the darkened parlor had listened in silence to the
entertainment that ended with ridicule and defamation of his hero, with
jeers of laughter for himself and Rose. Once more he had met with
deception—this time in one whom he had trusted and loved, even as he had
loved and trusted Sam—in her, of all others, who had promised to lead
him to the higher and better life.

As white and death-like as himself, Cynthia Schofield led him back to
his bed. There she tried to speak to him.

Peanut turned his face to the wall.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                   VI


THE letter which the postmaster handed to the Rose of Texas seemed
heavier than usual. The Rose hugged it all the way up the mountain. Then
out on the doorstep, where he had said good-by, she opened and read it.
The first sentence made her heart leap:

    DEAR ROSE,—I am coming back. I will start before morning. If I go
    west and keep on every day, some day I will get there. Miss
    Schofield told me once that it was fifteen hundred miles, so if I
    can walk fifteen miles a day it will take me a hundred days to get
    to the cabin and Sam’s grave. The money you gave me is not enough to
    come on the cars. I will spend it for things to eat. At ten cents a
    day it will last till I get home. Perhaps some days I won’t need to
    spend so much. I will wear the clothes you made me and my own hat
    and shoes. I have them all on now, and the lether sack with Sam’s
    ambertipe and the whissel, and the money. I would like to take the
    picture of the grave, but I shall leave it on the wall.

    I wrote you how Miss Schofield showed the picture of the grave and
    told about Sam’s good heart. When I am not there she tells how he
    had a cruel heart and was only good to me. And it is not true, and
    when she told how she met me at Sam’s grave she told other things
    that were not true, and that did not happen at all. She laughs at
    Sam and the grave and at you and me. And she makes other people
    laugh. That is all she cares for. I thaut she was like Sam, but she
    is not and I could not be good here either, where there are so many
    bad people and nothing is clean. The snow is so dirty here they take
    it right away and you can never hear the wind and rain. They have
    trees in the park and animals and birds in cages, but they make me
    cry because they are so homesick, like me. I want to come back to
    the hills where there is just you and the bears and Sam’s grave. If
    I start to-night and it takes a hundred days it will be more than a
    year since I went away. I will never leave you any more. I am
    obliged to Miss Schofield for sending me to school, but I cannot
    stay here now. I was yours before I was hers, and I will be yours
    again. Perhaps I can get some books and study lessons there with you
    and learn to be a naturallist, when I grow up, which means to live
    in the woods and know about the birds and animals, and I will dig
    gold out of the mines for us and I will put a white stone at Sam’s
    grave so we can see it from every-where.

    Now I am going to start. I am going to slip down-stairs and I will
    be out in the country before morning. Sam taut me how to hide, and
    how to keep in one direction. Perhaps I will write to you on the
    way, but I must not buy many stamps or paper. Anyway I will be
    coming all the time, and some day I will be there the same as ever.

              Yours,

                   PEANUT.

The Rose of Texas was a bundle of conflicting emotions by the time she
reached the end of this letter. But out of it all came one dominant joy.
Peanut was coming back to her—he was already on the way. Whatever
resentment she may have felt toward Miss Schofield was swallowed up in
this great fact.

As to Peanut’s ability to make the long journey, she did not question
it—not yet. She knew, of course, that the way was long, and would be
hard in places. How long or how hard, neither she nor any one could
know. She realized much more fully Peanut’s subtle knowledge of outdoor
life, his persistence, and the endurance of his wiry little frame. She
forgot that a winter of comparative inaction and close mental
application might have told on his physical powers. It would be a weary
journey, but with the long days of summer-time at hand he would not
fail, and September would bring him back to her.

She would begin preparing for him at once. She would make up one of the
new dresses, and leave off her second toddy to-morrow. Then there was
another purpose, which must be accomplished now, sooner than she had
expected. Her boy was coming back to her—not as she had once dreamed, in
a buggy, and wearing a tall silk hat—but, better still, the boy who had
gone away. He would find her ready to receive him.

But one thing troubled the Rose—the amount of Peanut’s resources. With
the aid of her fragmentary arithmetic she verified his calculation that
if a little boy traveled fifteen miles a day, and traveled a hundred
days, he would travel fifteen hundred miles; also, if the same little
boy had ten dollars, and spent ten cents of it every day, he would have
enough to last him through the journey. Only, she wished that he might
have more than ten cents a day. It seemed to her so little—she wondered
what he would buy with it. Crackers, mostly, she thought, and cheese.
The Rose thought of the eatables kept at the camp store, and sighed as
she remembered how little of them could be had for ten cents. If she
only knew where to send him more money. But she remembered hearing that
things were cheaper beyond the mountains, and this thought consoled her.

As the days passed, her confidence in Peanut’s ability to make the long
trip began to wane. Chicago lay far to the eastward, across rivers and
beyond mountains. She reasoned that there must be a road and bridges
between, but in her imagination she began to see the dusty little figure
toiling along in the sun, overcome by thirst and heat, where the
prairies were wide, and the houses far apart. At times she pictured him
as being run down by those terrible railroad trains, as waylaid and
robbed of his little store of money and left by the roadside to die.
Almost clairvoyantly, at night, she saw him asleep in fence-corners, in
haystacks, under bushes and ledges of rock—anywhere that afforded
shelter to the friendless little wayfarer toiling back to his beloved
hills. When the storm raged down the mountains she would open the door
and, looking out into the mystery of blackness, fancy she heard his thin
voice calling to her above the roar of the torrent and the wail of the
tree-tops. However busy her days, they no longer seemed brief, her
nights were no longer untroubled. She knew that he was still far away
beyond the mountains, yet twenty times a day she hastened to the door to
look and listen, while at night wild dreams brought her bolt upright to
answer to his call.

When two weeks had passed the stage one day brought her two letters. One
of them from Miss Schofield—written from a sense of duty, we may
believe—told, briefly and guardedly, of the strange disappearance of
Peanut. The writer assured the Rose that there was no cause for
uneasiness, that every effort was being made to find the missing boy and
that he was certain to be discovered in a brief time. The Rose smiled
grimly as she read this epistle, for the other one had been from
Peanut—just a line on a bit of wrapping-paper, to tell her that in seven
days he had reached Iowa, which was farther than he had expected to be
at that time. People had asked him to ride, sometimes, on their wagons.
There were nearly always good places to sleep—mostly in the woods, where
he had the birds and squirrels for company. He was well, and happier
than he had been for a year.

The Rose did not know where Iowa was. When she asked the postmaster he
showed it to her on the map. Then she did not know any better, but she
was comforted. Peanut wrote again when he reached Nebraska, but that was
nearly three weeks later, and the Rose had become almost desperate. Now
she was made briefly happy by the statement that he was still well, and
had money, and that he had found there were only two more states to
cross, Nebraska and Wyoming, and then a little more and he would be
home.

To the Rose a state was a state. That the distance yet to be traveled
was double that already covered, and many times more difficult, did not
occur to her. But when two weeks more had passed, and yet two more, and
brought no further word from the little wayfarer, her heart grew very
heavy again, and she haunted the camp post-office with each arrival of
the stage.

And still another two weeks went by, and yet he did not come, and the
days brought her no word. She did not know that the number of crackers
obtained by Peanut for five cents had been reduced in his westward march
from ten to eight, from eight to six, and that the bit of cheese
received in exchange for the other five cents had grown so small that
the little boy, alarmed, had feared to spend even the money necessary
for another letter. The Rose did not know these things, and even had she
known, it would hardly have lessened her anxiety.

She spent most of her time now in watching for him. The hundred days had
by no means expired, but his letters had led her to hope that he had
gained time and would be there sooner than he had calculated. According
to her count, if a little boy could cross two states in four weeks, he
could cross four states and something over in about nine weeks, and now
twelve weeks had gone by and he had not come. The fact that he no longer
wrote encouraged her to believe that at any moment he might walk in upon
her.

But now came an added anxiety. A letter, indeed, not from Peanut, but a
broken-hearted confession from Cynthia Schofield, who, good woman that
she was, acknowledged everything, begging the Rose to forgive her, and
to write if she knew aught of their little lad.

“It was all so strange and unsuited to him here,” she wrote. “I can see,
now, how he belonged only there in those beautiful hills and how his
life there would mean more to him, and to others, too, I believe, than
here in the sordid clatter and struggle and deception that he could not
endure—” Then, in closing, she added: “Sometimes I think he must have
started home, and I am having notices posted and published all along the
way, so that somebody may find him and keep him safely until I come.
Poor little fellow! Where is he, and what is he doing to-night, out all
alone in this great wicked waste of a world?”

The Rose comprehended little more than the grief of this letter, and she
pitied Miss Schofield, as one woman may pity another when there is but
one heart’s desire for both; but her sympathy vanished in the fear that
Miss Schofield’s agents with their wide knowledge and ample resources
would find the boy after all and that to her, the Rose, he would now be
lost forever.

She was in a frenzy of suspense. A hundred times she would have closed
the cabin and gone to meet him, but feared she might pass him by a
different way, and so wander on and on helplessly. Her anxiety at last
overcame her secretiveness, and she one day partially unburdened herself
to the postmaster, who informed her that for at least fifty miles to the
eastward there was but one road. This was in September, more than three
months from the night that Peanut had left Miss Schofield’s apartment in
Chicago. The Rose could wait no longer. She set out to meet him the same
afternoon.

She put on one of her new plain gowns, and a new, though not altogether
plain bonnet which the storekeeper had ordered for her from Ogden. She
started to put on her new shoes, too, but, remembering that she might
have far to walk, held to the old ones. Then she packed a basket with
eatables—good things such as Peanut had always liked. He would be tired
of the things he could buy with his ten cents a day along the road.
Tired? dear heart! As if a little boy trudging over range after range of
lofty mountains, only to find range after range of still loftier ones
beyond, could be tired of any kind of food! The Rose imagined how he
would welcome the freshly cooked bread, and the coffee which she would
make in the little pail. She felt much less unstrung now that she was
really going to meet him, and more nearly happy than she had been for
weeks. Only, she must hurry, and get as far as possible before
nightfall. Over her arm she threw a thick army blanket, for sleeping on
the ground.

It was well on toward two o’clock when she started. The path led by
Sam’s grave, and she paused an instant to regard the place with a new
pride. Then she pressed on—there would be time enough for this
afterward.

The Rose of Texas found it hard climbing the mountain road. She began to
realize now why it was that Peanut might be longer than he had counted
on, and her heart ached for him more, and her arms ached, too, under the
heavy load of blanket and basket. When she had been toiling up the hill
for perhaps three hours she wondered how many miles she had come. But at
a high turn of the road she paused to look back, and was surprised to
see—almost behind her, it seemed—her own steep hillside, with the little
clearing about Sam’s grave. It was fully six or seven miles away, but in
that clear air it seemed almost as if she might reach out and touch it.
Wearily she pushed on. Dark fell, and she halted for the night.

It grew very cold. The Rose attempted to kindle a fire, but she could
not find dry pieces, and the matches flickered and smoldered to
blackness. She huddled down in her blanket at last, realizing what this
night must mean to a hungry little boy with nothing but the sky to cover
him. Perhaps experience had taught Peanut a better means of providing,
but the Rose did not consider this, and through the bitter night saw him
crouching in the dark, shivering with cold and exposure. She did not
sleep, and before daybreak was toiling up the long incline.

The way grew ever steeper: she was nearing the mountain-top. It grew
lighter, too, and presently she noticed that the trees ahead were
fringed with morning. The sun was coming.

The fringe crept lower, the woods on either side turned to amethyst, a
spot of radiance lay on the high trail between. The Rose paused and,
looking up, gave welcome to the new day.

Then, all at once, in the patch of sunrise ahead, something dark
appeared; something that moved, hesitated, moved again, stopped. The
woman’s knees began to tremble exceedingly. Hastily shifting her
burdens, she shaded her eyes and looked steadily into the brightness.
Then she was sure. It was Peanut, and the glory behind him set a halo
upon his faded hair.

The wayfarer had returned. Who shall say across what desert wastes,
through what dark gorges, and by what dizzy heights the long path had
led him home—had brought him nearer to the abiding comfort of Sam’s
quiet grave and the rest of the enduring mountains? Who shall determine
what unseen power had sustained that frail body and guided those
wandering feet?

He had not seen her. She was in the shadow beneath, and he seemed
looking over her head to some faraway point beyond. For one supreme
instant the woman lingered to drink in the vision. Then basket, blanket,
and old restraints fell away as she pressed up the slope, the new dawn
shining in her face. He looked down then and saw her. These two had
never embraced, but a moment later he was in her arms and their tears
mingled.

“Peanut, oh, my poor little boy, how thin you are!”

“Oh, Rose, Rose! You bought it for him, didn’t you?”

For behold, from that high point the steep clearing on the far-off
hillside was once more visible. But the black stumps were no longer to
be seen, and in their place a white stone gleamed with the radiance of
morning.




                                THE END




------------------------------------------------------------------------

 ● Transcriber’s Notes:
    ○ Missing or obscured punctuation was corrected.
    ○ Unbalanced quotation marks were left as the author intended.
    ○ Typographical errors were silently corrected.
    ○ Inconsistent spelling and hyphenation were made consistent only
      when a predominant form was found in this book.
    ○ Text that was in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_).





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Peanut, by Albert Bigelow Paine

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PEANUT ***

***** This file should be named 56481-0.txt or 56481-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/6/4/8/56481/

Produced by Barry Abrahamsen and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

